---
layout: post
title: What is Machine Learning?
---

When I started getting in touch with Artificial Intelligence (AI), no one
could give me a clear
distinction between all those buzzwords such as "Artificial Intelligence",
"Pattern Recognition", "Data Mining" and "Machine Learning" (ML). It took
me a long time to actually be able to dintinguish the meaning of these,
and, to say the truth, it is still not very clear to me how exactly the
first three relate to each other. The meaning of "Machine Learning",
however, is very simple, and I believe it should have been made clearer
from day one. This post has the goal of separating "Machine Learning"
from this mess, making it very clear when something is ML and when
something is not, and what the relation between ML and AI is.

That said, while I do expect you to have a perfect notion of what is and
what is not part of the field after you read this blog post, I don't
intend to give you a better definition of the expression "Machine
Learning" than the definitions you may have already found in other places
in the web.


Why the confusion?
------------------

When I sat down to write this blog post, I thought of taking a look at
how others have defined the field before (because, of course, I didn't
expect to come up with any magic new definition). I came across this video
(from [the amazing course on Machine Learning in Coursera by Andrew Ng](https://www.coursera.org/learn/machine-learning)):

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/jmMcJ4XlrWM?list=PLZ9qNFMHZ-A4rycgrgOYma6zxF4BZGGPW?ecver=1" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

And this video:

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/WXHM_i-fgGo?ecver=1" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

If you watch them, you will see these three field definitions:

<p class="message">
Field of study that gives computers the ability to learn without being
explicitly programmed.
</p>

<p class="message">
A computer program is said to learn from experience E with respect to
some task T and some performance measure P if its performance on T,
as measured by P, improves with experience E.
</p>

These first two definitions are good, because they make it clear that
the programmer doesn't tell explicitly what the machine should do: the
behavior of the machine is completely dependent on the data it has
previously seen (and of course the ways in which the machine learns).

<p class="message">
"The extraction of knowledge from data"
</p>

A problem with this last definition is that it does not clarify *who*
extracts the knowledge from the data. If the programmer writes rules that
conform to the patterns in the data, does this count as Machine Learning?
(more on this in the next section)

If you look back at these three definitions, they may cause you
to be confused about what exactly the relation between Machine Learning
and other fields is. Why is it "Machine Learning" and not, say,
"Artificial Intelligence"? (and how is it related to AI, in the first
place?) And when am I applying AI that is not ML? And can I apply ML
that is not AI?


So... how do I explain this?
----------------------------

### An simple story

As I said, I don't actually intend to give any better definition. Any
definition I could present here could be probably invalidated after any
amount of some more "socratic" scrutinity. Instead, (and following the
field itself,) my explanation is based on examples.

Say you are a photographer who takes two types of pictures: (1)
landscapes; and (2) people's faces (say, for their CV). Let's assume
you have them all stored in a folder in your computer. One fine day you
decided to organize your pictures into two folders (`landscapes` and
`cv`). You started dumping some of your stored photos into the two
folders, but after some 50000 images you realized they were too many
and thought it would be nice to have some automatic method to do that.

In the lack of a better idea, you decide that an easy way to check if
the image is of a human is to count the ammount of pixels that have a
color similar to a human skin color. You create a rule that says
something like "if the image has more than 500 pixels of those colors,
then it is a `cv` picture".

You write a program that counts the number of pixels of those colors in
your images and moves the files to the respective folder. You run your
program and realize that you `cv` folder now has a lot of images of
sandy landscapes. Your program did not do what you hoped it would.

You look better at the images you had already classified, trying to
find patterns that could help you to identify the two types of images.
You make, say, a histogram of the colors in the two types of images and
realize that there is a set of
rules that you could apply that would work in most of your cases. You
implement those rules, run your program, and feel relatively satisfied:
you did as well as you could.

### Was this AI? Was this ML? (1)

Now... look back at the story and think about it: did you just _make_
AI? I would say that the answer should probably be *yes*: if your
program had worked, someone who has never seen what your program does
would have most probably believed your program was "intelligent". On the
other hand, your rules were engineered by you, and the machine was only
supposed to apply them to decide what to do. While you may feel you
"taught" the machine what it should do in each case, all the teaching
was done through "explicit programming" (see the first definition of
Machine Learning in the previous section).
In other words: it was not the machine who learnt; it was *you*.

### Revisiting your story

You think you could achieve some better performance, but you are not
sure exactly how. Instead of simply counting the colors of your pixels
and using this to conclude the type of the image, you think it would
be a nice idea to use some fancy image processing techniques. You
recall something called the "[Discrete Fourier Transformation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Discrete_Fourier_transform)", that
allows you to get a representation of the images in the "frequency
domain". You apply it to some of your already classified, and realize
that, truly, the `cv` pictures have a very specific pattern of
frequencies that you can develop some set of rules for... and
anything that does not conform to that pattern seem to be a landscape.
You implement your algorithm and feel a little more confident that
this time there are fewer errors.

### Was this AI? Was this ML? (2)

If you think the first version of your "image classifier" was AI, then
you should probably take this second version as AI. (One common
complaint among AI practitioners is that
[people stop taking something as AI as soon as they find out how it
works](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/AI_effect)).

On the other hand, could you say you just did ML? My answer is still
no: it is not because you applied some fancy "feature extraction"
algorithm to understand your data that you are now doing Machine
Learning. Again, all the extraction of knowledge is done by you, and
you just explicitly instructed the machine to follow what you
considered to be the best set of rules you could think of.

### So... well... then... actually... when is it ML?

Let's look one last time to your story. You came a long way until here:
used some [exploratory statistics](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Exploratory_data_analysis)
to find what the colors in each type of images can tell about them,
and also what frequency patterns your images most commonly have. You
implemented a [rule-based classifier](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rule-based_system)
that decided in which folder to put each one of your images.

But you feel all of these rules you developed are not good enough. It
would be great if the program could learn by itself what folder to put
each image in, based on examples of images of each type. Enter Machine
Learning!

When you apply Machine Learning, you don't want to tell what rules to
use: you give data, and you expect the program to figure out by itself
what to do. For example, let's say you still have those 50000 images
you had manually classified in the beginning of our story. Let's say
you heard of some popular image classification model called
[Convolutional Neural Network](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Convolutional_neural_network)
for which you found some code in the internet
and would like to try. In this case, for each one of your 50000
"training" images, you also tell the model what is the answer you
expect it to give back (i.e., either `cv` or `landscape`). When you
start, the model makes a lot of mistakes, outputting many times `cv`
when it was supposed to output `landscape`, and vice-versa. But every
time it makes a mistake, it updates its internal variables in
a way that causes it to become more likely to answer right the next time.
When the model is done training, you should expect it to answer right
most of the times (at least for those 50000 images you were using to
train it).

Now that it is done training, you put those 50000 images aside and
use the already trained model to put all of your other images in their
respective folder. Notice that you didn't tell the model what to look
for in each image. You may have told it how to update its internal
variables, but you didn't explicitly develop any rule. The "rules"
were found by the model itself. It learned them!

### Some final thoughts

Machine Learning is a huge field, and is going through some nice hype
in the last few years. The example I gave in the previous subsections
uses something called "[Supervised Learning](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Supervised_learning)",
which is when you tell the model
what is the expected answer for each training instance. There are
other models for which you don't have to explicitly point out
the "right answer" every time (and that are useful when you don't have
those 50000 manually labeled examples you trained your Convolutional
Neural Network with).

The models may also learn several different types of things. In the
case of Convolutional Neural Networks, it is actually not 100% clear
what the networks are learning; however, other types of models may
learn, say, rules, just like those you were trying to develop manually
in the beginning of our story.


Other resources
---------------

There are a lot of resources in the internet on both AI and ML. There
are some, however, that are my favorites, which I thought of linking
here.

### On Artificial Intelligence:

 * [The AI Revolution: The Road to Superintelligence](https://waitbutwhy.com/2015/01/artificial-intelligence-revolution-1.html)
   There are two parts. I am linking only the first one because the
   other part is also easy to find there. This post links to A LOT
   of other nice stuff that I find extremely interesting, like
   [this 1993 essay on the idea of a singularity in AI](http://edoras.sdsu.edu/~vinge/misc/singularity.html).

 * [Artificial Intelligence & Personhood](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=39EdqUbj92U&list=PL8dPuuaLjXtNgK6MZucdYldNkMybYIHKR&index=23):
   A video on what could happen if we reach a point when AI becomes
   good enough.
   (I am linking the entire playlist because I do think that a lot of
   the stuff there is absurdly relevant to the topic)

### On Machine Learning

 * [The amazing course on Machine Learning in Coursera by Andrew Ng](https://www.coursera.org/learn/machine-learning),
   that I had already linked before.

 * [Some nice tutorial on Machine Learning from Google](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cKxRvEZd3Mw)


